---
title: World Gone Wrong (Album)
permalink: World Gone Wrong (Album)
layout: wiki
tags:
 - Albums
---

Recorded May 1993  
Released Oct 26, 1993

<div id="songs">
1.  [World Gone Wrong](World Gone Wrong)
2.  [Love Henry](Love Henry)
3.  [Ragged &amp; Dirty](Ragged &amp; Dirty)
4.  [Blood in My Eyes](Blood in My Eyes)
5.  [Broke Down Engine](Broke Down Engine)
6.  [Delia](Delia)
7.  [Stack A Lee](Stack A Lee)
8.  [Two Soldiers](Two Soldiers)
9.  [Jack-A-Roe](Jack-A-Roe)
10. [Lone Pilgrim](Lone Pilgrim)

</div>
<div id="intro">
<h2>
Introductory Remarks

</h2>
<h3>
Eyolf Østrem

</h3>
<em>World Gone Wrong</em> (1993) is a body. Not just a great body of
work, but a body.

The greatness of this album of folk and blues classics is that there is
<em>one</em> voice speaking on it and one person speaking with this
voice, whether he speaks guitar, harmonica, or English.

I’ll try to make it a little clearer.

<h3>
Not-a-one-man-band

</h3>
Perhaps if I start by saying what it’s not: The tracks on <em>World Gone
Wrong</em> are not those of a one-man band, a skilled display by a
person who can speak different languages at the same time, or, more
down-to-earth, is able to sing and play harp and guitar at the same
time.

Instead, it is as if the different parts of the performance — words,
guitar, language, harmonica, rhythm, sound — come together and blend
into one; <em>here</em> more than on any other Dylan album (or any album
whatsoever, probably).

<h3>
You speak to me in body language

</h3>
It is as if the different parts of the performance represent different
facets of the same language, which materialize first as ‘mouth language’
(which is not to be confused with spoken language): voice range, talking
speed, voice quality, and — as a special case — harmonica style; and as
‘hand language’: the guitar playing. The languages of these different
body parts are so prominent that they together form, if not a full human
body, then at least the image of one, the impression of a full body in
our presence, speaking body language in sound.

To phrase it differently, what I hear on <em>World Gone Wrong</em> is
all the informational extras, the toppings on the ‘message’: that which
we see/experience/understand when we speak with someone face to face,
but which disappear in <em>this</em> medium, the disembodied text (or
the un-incarnated Word, which is more or less the same), where they are
replaced with smilies or rhetorics (or parentheses like this one).

Hence the distinction between ‘mouth language’ and the language that
comes out of the mouth: speaking is a physical act of communication.

The stylized worlds of music and poetry frequently lead an uncertain
life in-between: poetry departs from the written word by drawing
attention to the physical quality of words and text. And singing usually
takes one step back from the act of speaking, by inserting a layer of
artfulness and/or aesthetics between what is said and who says it,
adding something in the process, but at the cost of blurring the person
at the other end.

But on <em>World Gone Wrong</em> I can hear him. I hear all that which
<em>fleshes out</em> the message, i.e. makes it appear <em>in the
flesh</em>, as a human expression and not just as a stick figure.

This would not have been possible had Dylan not been a great, natural
guitar player: technically speaking, <em>World Gone Wrong</em> is
Dylan’s greatest achievement as a guitarist since <em>Freewheelin’</em>.
Worth pointing out is the consistent technique of picking out the melody
line or fragments of it on the bass strings and strum on in the higher
strings as if nothing special was happening. Two Soldiers is the
standout track in this respect, but also Love Henry and one of the many
superb outtakes in Dylan’s production, <strong>You Belong To Me</strong>
shine. Delia and Ragged and Dirty do some of the same: the little riffs
that go through each of those songs, echo snippets of melody line as
well. World Gone Wrong could be on the curriculum of any course in “Solo
song with guitar accompaniment”.

But even more important is the way Dylan makes the guitar one with the
body, hence with the voice, hence with what comes out through the voice:
the words. The interludes and ornaments flow as freely and naturally as
the syllables of the text. An alacrity in the words is transformed into
strokes on the strings — a slightly harder strum here, a vaguely
noticeable tempo gain or hesitation there. The strokes set and adjust to
a pace: the guitar breathes.

<h3>
The Limbs of the Body

</h3>
Among the individual performances, I have favourites, of course,
musically speaking. But at the other end, I really can’t pick any of
them out as superfluous, just as little as I can tell which finger I
could do without.

<strong>“World Gone Wrong”</strong>, the title track and opener, is the
most unappealing, unseductive opening track in Dylan’s catalogue. Never
has his voice been raspier, more piercing, less redeeming. When the
album came out, I still had a couple of albums from the back catalogue
left to buy, and I was standing in the record store, trying to choose
between some classic and this new one. When I heard the first seconds, I
thought: “This is grim! I must have it.” I still feel the same about it.

<strong>‘Blood in my Eyes’</strong> was one of the first songs I sat
down to seriously figure out the chords to, and it was one of the first
tab files at what was later to become
[dylanchords.](http://dylanchords.info) It’s not revolutionary, it’s not
pretty, and it’s not showy or particularly difficult. But it’s hypnotic
and near, and I thought: “I must know how he does that.” I still feel
the same about it too.

Apropos hypnotic: <strong>‘Ragged and Dirty’</strong> . . . The hours I
spent playing that little riff over and over again — some would say they
were spent in vain and are now lost forever, but that’s a lie: they have
etched that sound-and-body union into my fingers and my soul, and
brought the memories of that part of my life with them. I’d be a poorer
man and a lesser person without them.

The same goes for the little riffs and interludes in songs like Love
Henry, Lone Pilgrim, and Delia. They are all based on the same figure,
over the same chord structure. And they are all repeated almost
identically throughout the songs: it would have easy for a musician with
Dylan’s good knowledge of the style to vary the riffs, but the only
variation there is, comes from imperfection: a wrong finger placement
here, an accidentally struck string there, and here and there a missed
beat.

In fact, the whole album is based on the same figures over the same
chord structures: most of the songs are played with C type chords
(varied through different capo position), embellished with Csus4 or
Csus2 chords, either to echo the melody line, or as “hints” of F; and
the Gsus4-like chord `xx3300` which is so prominent in ‘Blood In My
Eyes” is used in many of the other songs too.

<div style="float: right; width: 35%; margin-left: 20px;">
`       `<img style="width: 100%;" title="Stick figure" src="http://oestrem.com/thingstwice/wp-content/uploads/2009/03/wire.png" alt="Down in the Groove: a stick figure">`Down in the Groove: a`

stick figure

</div>
This lack of variation might have led to the same verdict as for [Down
in the Groove](http://dylanchords.info/30_down/index.htm), but it
doesn’t. In fact, the difference between the albums couldn’t have been
bigger. The difference is in principle the same as between “Mixed Up
Confusion” and “In the Morning”, which I’ve [discussed
earlier](http://dylanchords.info/professors/momentum.htm): one fills a
pattern the same way every time, and after five, ten, hundred
repetitions, it becomes clear that the pattern is all there is. The
other can be seen as a pattern the same way that people can (two arms,
two legs, etc.), but in the end, what we notice and remember are all the
things that deviate from the pattern, and we recognize the person as an
individual, even though it may be hard to describe why.

The use of Csus4 chords instead of F is a case in point: the pattern —
the three-chord pattern of most western music — prescribes F, and it is
perfectly possible to play F everywhere there is a Csus4. But Dylan
doesn’t want that. The slot which schematically is an F chord, is
occupied with every possible shade of chord between C and F. The
differences are hinted at more than stated.

<div style="float: right;  width: 40%; margin-left: 20px;">
<img style="width: 100%;" title="body" src="http://oestrem.com/thingstwice/wp-content/uploads/2009/03/body.png" alt="World Gone Wrong: a body in sound">World
Gone Wrong: a body in sound

</div>
It is as if he is saying: this may be a song with a fixed verse and
chord structure, but musically, this isn’t poetry, it’s prose. It’s a
human talking freely, someone speaking guitar — not someone following
and (ful)filling a given pattern.

The same variability can be seen on the rhythmical level.
<strong>Delia</strong> is the most extreme case. The wait before the
final “All the friend I ever had are gone” is differently long every
time. Sometimes the basic pulse is maintained, but more often it is not.
It is borderline annoying. The performance is balancing on the edge of
falling apart, but miraculously it doesn’t. Again: the variations give
body where the plain structure is just dead surface.

Greatest of them all, <strong>‘Broke Down Engine’</strong>: Dylan’s best
guitar track since ‘Hero Blues’, the outtake from <em>Freewheelin’</em>.
The rhythmic drive and the precision of the playing is fabulous. The
“Lordy lord” part is amazing, in more ways than one: It’s well played,
of course, but it is also a good illustration of the synergy of body
languages: I find it impossible to sing that line without a guitar, but
effortless when the two are together.

I’ve always heard this song as the shadow of a rock history in
miniature. There is a clear connection between Dylan’s version and Blind
Wille McTell’s original, but despite the strong continuity, Dylan could
never have played the way he does without forty years of rock in his
baggage. This is not to say that Dylan’s version is a rock’n'roll song —
far from it. But there is an energy, a punch, an attack in the playing
which is not and could never have been there in Blind Willie’s playing —
because he hadn’t heard Chuck Berry and Little Richard.

I haven’t said anything about the texts. That’s not because I don’t care
about them — on the contrary, I feel very strongly about many of them.
But while my most common impression of the interplay between words and
music is that the music may enhance the words, it is the other way
around here: I hear the lyrics as a commentary to the music. If I can
identify with the ragged and dirty one who sneaks out the back door when
his lover’s husband comes home, it is because I can identify first with
the riff and the bodily state it puts me in.

</div>

